next phase/README.md, before:

# 🏛️ The Master's Thesis: Arabic FunctionGemma Architectural Deep Dive
## A Comprehensive Study on Parameter Efficiency, Memory Optimization, and Gradient Dynamics

This guide provides a rigorous analysis of the fine-tuning process for **FunctionGemma-270M**. We bridge the gap between high-level code implementation and the underlying mathematical principles that allow a 270M model to achieve state-of-the-art performance in Arabic function calling.

---

### 𝚽 Section 1: Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) - The Linear Algebra of Tuning

In standard fine-tuning, we update the weight matrix $W \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times k}$. For Gemma-270M, the total parameter count makes full-rank updates computationally prohibitive. LoRA solves this by approximating the weight update $\Delta W$ through low-rank decomposition.

#### 1.1 The Fundamental Equation
The forward pass through a LoRA-enhanced linear layer is defined as:

$$ h = W_{0}x + \frac{\alpha}{r}(A \times B)x $$

- **$W_{0}$ (Frozen Weights):** The pre-trained weights from Google.
- **$A \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times r}$:** The "In-Projection" matrix, initialized with Gaussian noise.
- **$B \in \mathbb{R}^{r \times k}$:** The "Out-Projection" matrix, initialized to zero.
- **$r$ (Rank):** The dimension of the low-rank space.

#### 1.2 The Code-to-Math Mapping
```python
model = FastModel.get_peft_model(
    model,
    r = 32,             # Our Rank (r)
    lora_alpha = 64,    # Scaling Factor (alpha)
    target_modules = ["q_proj", "k_proj", "v_proj", "o_proj",
                      "gate_proj", "up_proj", "down_proj"],
)
```
**Pedagogical Deep Dive:**
The scaling factor $\alpha/r$ (here $64/32 = 2$) is essentially the "learning intensity." Since we are training a tiny model (270M) on a complex new task (Arabic), we use a high scaling factor to ensure the new "adapters" exert significant influence over the pre-trained output. By targeting all projections (including the MLP's `gate_proj`), we allow the model to learn both the **Attention** (how tokens relate) and the **Knowledge** (how to map Arabic words to JSON values).

---

### 𝚽 Section 2: Memory Optimization via Selective Recomputation

The primary bottleneck in transformer training is the storage of activations during the forward pass to be used in the backward pass.

#### 2.1 The Memory Complexity Problem
In standard training, memory scales linearly with the number of layers:

$$ Memory_{std} = O(L \times N \times D) $$

Where $L$ is layers, $N$ is sequence length, and $D$ is hidden dimension.

#### 2.2 The Triton Optimization
Unsloth utilizes custom **Triton Kernels** to implement **Selective Activation Recomputation**. Instead of storing the activation $h$, the system stores only the input and the random seed. During the backward pass, it re-executes the forward operation on-the-fly.

**Mathematical Result:**
The memory complexity is reduced to being independent of the number of layers:

$$ Memory_{unsloth} = O(N \times D) $$

**The Code Implementation:**
```python
model, tokenizer = FastLanguageModel.from_pretrained(
    model_name = "unsloth/functiongemma-270m-it",
    use_gradient_checkpointing = "unsloth", # The Triton switch
)
```

---

### 𝚽 Section 3: Optimization & Gradient Masking

We use **Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)** to minimize the **Cross-Entropy Loss** ($L$).

#### 3.1 The Loss Function
The objective is to minimize the negative log-likelihood of the target tokens:

$$ L = - \sum_{t} \log P(x_{t} | x_{<t}) $$

#### 3.2 Label Masking for Precision
To prevent the model from wasting capacity learning the user's prompt, we apply a mask. 

**The Logic:**
We set labels for instruction tokens to $-100$. In the PyTorch implementation of Cross-Entropy, any label with value $-100$ is ignored in the sum.

**The Code Implementation:**
```python
trainer = train_on_responses_only(
    trainer,
    instruction_part = "<start_of_turn>user\n",
    response_part = "<start_of_turn>model\n",
)
```
**Academic Insight:** This forces the gradient $\nabla L$ to only reflect errors in the model's function-calling response. It ensures the model's weights are only updated to better understand "how to act," not "how to repeat the user."

---

### 𝚽 Section 4: The Convergence Schedule (Cosine Decay)

#### 4.1 The Learning Rate Dynamics
We use a **Warmup-then-Decay** strategy to navigate the loss landscape.
- **Warmup (200 steps):** Prevents the weights from diverging early by slowly increasing the LR.
- **Cosine Decay:** Smoothly reduces the LR to zero.

#### 4.2 The Decay Equation
The learning rate $\eta$ at step $t$ follows:

$$ \eta_{t} = \eta_{min} + \frac{1}{2}(\eta_{max} - \eta_{min})(1 + \cos(\frac{T_{cur}}{T_{max}}\pi)) $$

**The Code Implementation:**
```python
args = SFTConfig(
    learning_rate = 1e-3,       # Peak Learning Rate (eta_max)
    lr_scheduler_type = "cosine",
    warmup_steps = 200,         # Ramp-up period
)
```
**Deep Dive:** The high peak LR ($10^{-3}$) is necessary because the LoRA rank $r=32$ represents a very narrow path in the total parameter space. We need a strong gradient to "push" the model into the specific manifold required for Arabic function calling.

---

Commit message:

docs: deep-dive explanation for the NLL loss function

next phase/README.md, after:

# 🏛️ The Master's Thesis: Arabic FunctionGemma Architectural Deep Dive
## A Comprehensive Study on Parameter Efficiency, Memory Optimization, and Gradient Dynamics

This guide provides a rigorous analysis of the fine-tuning process for **FunctionGemma-270M**. We bridge the gap between high-level code implementation and the underlying mathematical principles that allow a 270M model to achieve state-of-the-art performance in Arabic function calling.

---

### 𝚽 Section 1: Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) - The Linear Algebra of Tuning

In standard fine-tuning, we update the weight matrix $W \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times k}$. For Gemma-270M, the total parameter count makes full-rank updates computationally prohibitive. LoRA solves this by approximating the weight update $\Delta W$ through low-rank decomposition.

#### 1.1 The Fundamental Equation
The forward pass through a LoRA-enhanced linear layer is defined as:

$$ h = W_{0}x + \frac{\alpha}{r}(A \times B)x $$

- **$W_{0}$ (Frozen Weights):** The pre-trained weights from Google.
- **$A \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times r}$:** The "In-Projection" matrix, initialized with Gaussian noise.
- **$B \in \mathbb{R}^{r \times k}$:** The "Out-Projection" matrix, initialized to zero.
- **$r$ (Rank):** The dimension of the low-rank space.

#### 1.2 The Code-to-Math Mapping
```python
model = FastModel.get_peft_model(
    model,
    r = 32,             # Our Rank (r)
    lora_alpha = 64,    # Scaling Factor (alpha)
    target_modules = ["q_proj", "k_proj", "v_proj", "o_proj",
                      "gate_proj", "up_proj", "down_proj"],
)
```
**Pedagogical Deep Dive:**
The scaling factor $\alpha/r$ (here $64/32 = 2$) is essentially the "learning intensity." Since we are training a tiny model (270M) on a complex new task (Arabic), we use a high scaling factor to ensure the new "adapters" exert significant influence over the pre-trained output. By targeting all projections (including the MLP's `gate_proj`), we allow the model to learn both the **Attention** (how tokens relate) and the **Knowledge** (how to map Arabic words to JSON values).

---

### 𝚽 Section 2: Memory Optimization via Selective Recomputation

The primary bottleneck in transformer training is the storage of activations during the forward pass to be used in the backward pass.

#### 2.1 The Memory Complexity Problem
In standard training, memory scales linearly with the number of layers:

$$ Memory_{std} = O(L \times N \times D) $$

Where $L$ is layers, $N$ is sequence length, and $D$ is hidden dimension.

#### 2.2 The Triton Optimization
Unsloth utilizes custom **Triton Kernels** to implement **Selective Activation Recomputation**. Instead of storing the activation $h$, the system stores only the input and the random seed. During the backward pass, it re-executes the forward operation on-the-fly.

**Mathematical Result:**
The memory complexity is reduced to being independent of the number of layers:

$$ Memory_{unsloth} = O(N \times D) $$

**The Code Implementation:**
```python
model, tokenizer = FastLanguageModel.from_pretrained(
    model_name = "unsloth/functiongemma-270m-it",
    use_gradient_checkpointing = "unsloth", # The Triton switch
)
```

---

### 𝚽 Section 3: Optimization & Gradient Masking

We use **Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)** to minimize the **Autoregressive Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL)**, which is the mathematical basis for Cross-Entropy Loss in Language Models.

#### 3.1 The Loss Function (In-Depth)
The objective is to minimize the total "surprise" of the model when predicting the ground-truth tokens in your Arabic dataset:

$$ L = - \sum_{t=1}^{T} \log P(x_{t} | x_{<t}, \theta) $$

**Deep Breakdown of the Equation:**
- **$P(x_{t} | x_{<t}, \theta)$:** This represents the probability assigned by the model (parameterized by $\theta$) to the correct token at position $t$, given all preceding tokens $x_{<t}$.
- **$\log$:** We take the logarithm because it transforms the product of probabilities into a sum of log-probabilities, which is numerically stable and simplifies the calculation of the gradient $\nabla L$.
- **$\sum_{t=1}^{T}$:** We sum the log-probabilities across the entire sequence of length $T$.
- **Negative Sign ($-$)**: Since probabilities are $\leq 1$, their logs are $\leq 0$. We negate the sum so that we are **minimizing** a positive value. As $L$ approaches 0, the model becomes "certain" of the correct output.

#### 3.2 Label Masking for Precision
To prevent the model from wasting capacity learning the user's prompt, we apply a mask. 

**The Logic:**
We set labels for instruction tokens to $-100$. In the PyTorch implementation of Cross-Entropy, any label with value $-100$ is ignored in the sum.

**The Code Implementation:**
```python
trainer = train_on_responses_only(
    trainer,
    instruction_part = "<start_of_turn>user\n",
    response_part = "<start_of_turn>model\n",
)
```
**Academic Insight:** This forces the gradient $\nabla L$ to only reflect errors in the model's function-calling response. It ensures the model's weights are only updated to better understand "how to act," not "how to repeat the user."

---

### 𝚽 Section 4: The Convergence Schedule (Cosine Decay)

#### 4.1 The Learning Rate Dynamics
We use a **Warmup-then-Decay** strategy to navigate the loss landscape.
- **Warmup (200 steps):** Prevents the weights from diverging early by slowly increasing the LR.
- **Cosine Decay:** Smoothly reduces the LR to zero.

#### 4.2 The Decay Equation
The learning rate $\eta$ at step $t$ follows:

$$ \eta_{t} = \eta_{min} + \frac{1}{2}(\eta_{max} - \eta_{min})(1 + \cos(\frac{T_{cur}}{T_{max}}\pi)) $$

**The Code Implementation:**
```python
args = SFTConfig(
    learning_rate = 1e-3,       # Peak Learning Rate (eta_max)
    lr_scheduler_type = "cosine",
    warmup_steps = 200,         # Ramp-up period
)
```
**Deep Dive:** The high peak LR ($10^{-3}$) is necessary because the LoRA rank $r=32$ represents a very narrow path in the total parameter space. We need a strong gradient to "push" the model into the specific manifold required for Arabic function calling.

---
